student protests against the war in Gaza
have spread to universities across the
United States several colleges have
closed off campuses and switched to
remote learning some universities called
in police to break up protest camps
hundreds have been arrested since last
week administrators fear the ciens could
Stoke anti-Semitism but the students say
they're defending Free
Speech another day another round of pro
Gaza
demonstrations at Colombia's New York
camp
as the protests end to their seventh day
charged of anti-Semitism are causing a
political crisis with calls for the
college's President to
resign over 130 people were arrested on
Monday evening at a protest organized by
NYU
students the mayor of New York said hate
has no place in the city this is the New
York City Police Department
I know what it is to March the streets I
know what it is to protect protesters as
the police
officers this is a different energy that
I'm
seeing but the movement is spreading
beyond the streets of
Manhattan with encampments now occupying
college campuses across the United
States um I'm one of the organizers um
leading uh MIT Jews for ceasefire um and
we're out here joining in this
encampment because we know as Jewish
people our Liberation our safety is tied
up in the safety of the Palestinians and
it's day 199 of genocide um and that's
far past the line the main demand of
protesters is for colleges to devest
economic ties to Israel over its
handling of the Gaza war and with any
companies involved in the production of
weapons um so the divestment campaign is
basically um
our demands are basically to to divesity
University of Minnesota from weapons
manufacturing companies that bomb places
that create weapons that bomb places
like Yemen um Palestine G Gaza to be
specific and all other countries around
the globe house Speaker Mike Johnson is
set to visit Colombia on Wednesday to
address what his office called the rise
of virent
anti-Semitism but politicians beginning
to weigh into the debate in a feal
election year seems an unlikely
intervention to cool the
rhetoric let's get the latest from our
Washington correspondent Benjamin
Alvarez Gruber joining me now Benjamin
University administration's really in
the spotlight here with some even
deciding to call in police to detain
protesters what can you tell
us that's right some universities like
Colombia or NYU New York University have
taken that decision schools are told to
send Communications if they want NYPD
the New York Police Department to come
in that's what the mayor Eric Adams the
mayor of New York said earlier today at
a press conference he stressed that
that's the procedure for private
property and that is different with what
NYPD does on the streets for those who
are protesting outside of the
universities and that's something that
we have been seeing because they're not
just protests within the universities
but also supporters who gather outside
of the gates of the university to
support the students that are setting up
this encampment at Columbia University
the students that Pro protested and they
said that they will keep the so-called
Gaza solidarity encampment until the
University divests from companies with
ties to Israel last weekend on on Sunday
I was there I covered this encampment
there it's a small time frame that we
journalists get to also get it to campus
grounds and there were Flyers that were
handed out stating that they would
remain until the university divests all
finances so we have to see how that
develops and what the steps that
University president and all those on
management will take now will look like
in the next couple of days and Benjamin
give us a little context here how do
these protests against the war in Gaza
play into long running debates on us
campuses about Free
Speech long running debates indeed and
the debate over free speech is ongoing
as we see more universities joining the
protest not just at Colombia where
faculty members even joined students for
a walk Cod yesterday but also in other
schools that are seeing their own prot Z
own encampments now NYU the University
of Michigan MIT the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology Yale to give you
just a few examples and the president of
Colombia University said she was deeply
saddened by the situation on campus and
she said that we cannot allow one group
to dictate the terms and attempts to
disrupt important Milestones like a
graduation and that's something that
supports the protesters have also said
that they will continue pushing in those
encampments and even the white weighed
in on this discussion stressing that
there is a ride to peaceful protest in
the US but the calls for violence and
physical intimidation targeting Jewish
students in the Jewish Community are
anti-semitic and dangerous and have
absolutely no place on any college
campuses or anywhere in this country
Benjamin thank you for that update that
is DW's Benjamin alvaris grouper in
Washington
DC now the protests gripping us college
campuses are just the latest example of
how the war in Gaza is inflaming public
opinion in countries around the world in
the US those divisions are being watched
especially closely in this election year
some pundits are even saying that
President Joe Biden's position which is
unpopular among many Democratic voters
could cost him the
election the United States has
historically been a strong supporter of
Israel it was the first to recognize the
state when it was founded in
1948 however the high number of Civilian
deaths in the war in Gaza has sparked a
heated debate and fueled a shift in
public opinion I don't like people to
even call it Israel I rather call it
Netanyahu and his
cronies cuz I'm sure there are a lot of
good people in Israel I'm on no team but
just for it to end yeah I think the it's
the US's job to encourage there to be a
ceasefire over there and stop supporting
the war and sending weapons and stuff
over there I just disagree with them I
don't I don't think it's the right right
position to take Hamas is just going to
attack him again yeah I mean with Tik
Tok and Instagram I we get a lot of
firsthand accounts of everything that's
happening so we don't have to rely on
just the news to give us the
information the media placs a
significant role in shaping public
opinion Sarah Allison from The
Washington Post a media expert explains
how various media Outlets are discussing
the war at the outset that most of the
American coverage on mainstream
television Outlets was really focused on
the original attack over time we've seen
you know as the Israeli assault on Gaza
has gone on for months and months
there's more attention across all
platforms on the humanitarian crisis in
Gaza and the civilian casualties what
we've seen in polling is that there's a
real generational divide now that is
that is opening up and older Americans
people who have an actual memory of the
Holocaust or whose parents were involved
um in the
Holocaust still feel a real commitment
and a real obligation to support Israel
younger Generations have only known a
strong Israel and an Israel who wins
Wars the current Trend continues it
stands to reason that that will decrease
over time the Gaza conflict has also
exposed divisions within the political
landscape especially within the
Democratic party while 51% of Democrats
say Israel has gone too far only 11% of
Republicans agree 38% of Democrats are
in support to reducing aid for Israel
while only 10% of Republicans want this
reduction if President Biden doesn't
soon find a way to push Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to do more
to minimize civilian casualties the isra
da bombard of Gaza could very likely
cost him his reelection potentially
bringing a president back to the White
House for whom suffering in Gaza May
mean even less for his unwavering
support for
Israel let's get across to Washington DC
for some perspective and speak to us
politics analyst Liz Shula Liz welcome
on Monday Joe Biden made his first
public remarks on these protest TS
across uh college campuses across the
United States in this very sensitive
political moment we heard him calling
them anti-semitic is that the reaction
that you would expect from the US
President Joe Biden has been incredibly
strong on supporting Israel on um
keeping a watchful eye on protests and
calling out where it is anti-Semitic so
having known um some of President
Biden's past
um reactions to this I'm not at all
surprised he called this out um there is
a lot of footage and a lot of
information still coming out of these
protests so I think it is a um very
complex situation um but if he's saying
that he's seeing that I'm not surprised
he would call it out where he sees it
now we've said that this this is causing
divisions within the Democratic party
the issue of Israel's war in Gaza when
the Democrats are looking ahead to
November what are they thinking in terms
of strategy and how to approach these
campus
protests absolutely I mean everything at
this point is pivoting towards November
I think there's going to be a huge
question within the Democratic party one
they do not want a heated contested
convention in the late summer early fall
which there's been a lot of parallels
drawn to 1968 already which was a very
heated cont uh convention for the
Democrats and ended up losing them the
presidency they need to go into the fall
unified that balance of how do we unify
needs to be also with who's actually
coming out and voting for us who's um
getting folks to the polls and what are
the other really huge issues at stake
here Biden has hammered time and time
again rights on women is Central to his
strategy um just today he announced a
huge um push on climate change he has
done more um than than almost other
president on addressing climate change
on addressing investment in
infrastructure so he's going to have
this real tricky balance of yes we need
to talk about the divisions within the
party we need to take seriously folks
that are willing to get out their door
and protest while also understanding
there is a lot outside of this one issue
at stake with this election so you have
these major issues which will certainly
play a huge role in the elections
climate change um immigration is another
one of course I'm curious though how how
much generally foreign policy issues
typically weigh on the minds of us
voters when they go to the
polls I'm someone who's passionate about
foreign policy passionate about the
transatlantic Alliance and it it breaks
my heart a little bit to say every time
the presidential comes around it is not
ever a top issue for voters voters first
and foremost always think with their
pocketbooks how does the economy feel
how do their salaries feel how does the
cost of living feel de and then we've
seen a real push since 2020 2018 of
women you know we're seeing women switch
sides we're seeing women for the first
time voting because of the attacks on
women and these tend to Trump for lack
of a better word foreign policy so I
think there is a chance this is such a
particular uh Tinder Box of um voter
engagement around this specific issue uh
but I'm never too hopeful that foreign
policy and understanding the Nu nuances
of foreign policy are ever that much of
a sway on American voters do you think
this is an issue that could die down by
the time November rolls around and and
and just to follow up a little bit I
mean this this clearly has been an issue
that's ignited passions do you think
that Biden has done enough to convince
voters within his party who are
seriously worried uh about the plight of
the
Palestinians that's a couple part
question and and again it gets to uh has
he done enough to convince them he's
taking it seriously he has he's he's
called for an immediate ceasefire which
was one of the initial early pushes he's
um had continued intense conversations
with Netanyahu about where red lines are
um about focusing on humanitarian
approaches reducing civilian casualties
what he really needs to convince is
voters that they should get out and vote
that it is important to continue voting
for him I think the biggest issue to
this election for him to be voter apathy
and how do you make sure that they're G
to stick with him even though that this
is a hard time understanding he's still
working on it and it's worth investing
in another four years well thank you so
much for sharing your insights with us
that is Liz schula in Washington DC